.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Caspar Schutijser <caspar@schutijser.com>
.\"
.\" This file is part of the Trojita Qt IMAP e-mail client,
.\" http://trojita.flaska.net/
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License or (at your option) version 3 or any later version
.\" accepted by the membership of KDE e.V. (or its successor approved
.\" by the membership of KDE e.V.), which shall act as a proxy
.\" defined in Section 14 of version 3 of the license.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TROJITA 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm trojita
.Nd fast Qt IMAP e-mail client
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl achlmv
.Op Fl p Ar profile
.Op url
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a fast Qt IMAP e-mail client.
Optionally,
an RFC2368 mailto
.Ar url
may be specified.
This will open the compose window with a message
constructed from the specified URL.
.Pp
.Nm
supports multiple profiles which allows the use of multiple IMAP accounts.
Multiple instances of
.Nm ,
each using a different profile,
may be started concurrently.
A profile may be specified using
.Fl p .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a , -addressbook
Show the addressbook window.
.It Fl c , -compose
Compose a new e-mail
(default when
.Ar url
is provided).
.It Fl h , -help
Show help text.
.It Fl l , -log-to-disk
Activate debug traffic logging to disk immediately on startup.
.It Fl m , -mainwindow
Show the main window
(default when no option is provided).
.It Fl p , -profile Ar profile
Use the specified profile.
.It Fl v , -version
Show the version of
.Nm .
.El
.Sh FILES
The location of
.Nm Ns 's
configuration file and cache is determined by Qt.
On XDG platforms,
the configuration file can be found in
.Pa ~/.config/flaska.net
while the cache can be found in
.Pa ~/.cache/flaska.net .
For more details and information about other platforms,
see
.Lk https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qstandardpaths.html#StandardLocation-enum .
.Sh EXAMPLES
Compose a new e-mail to
.Mt alice@example.net :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ trojita -c 'mailto:alice@example.net?subject=Hi&body=Message.'
.Ed
.Pp
Launch
.Nm
using a profile:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ trojita -p work
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Lk http://trojita.flaska.net/
